[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the IBM Podcast Network.
[Amit Varma]: I had a strange dream the other night.
[Amit Varma]: I dreamed that I died and went to heaven.
[Amit Varma]: At least that's what the entry gate said.
[Amit Varma]: There was a sign that told me, welcome to heaven.
[Amit Varma]: So I went in and there was some sweet music at the start.
[Amit Varma]: And I thought, ah, this is going to be wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe there will be unlimited seafood platters here.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe there will be slaves in silk harem pants who will hold up grapes above my face
[Amit Varma]: as I reclined languorously on a couch.
[Amit Varma]: All day long, I will get massages from voluptuous women who keep telling me how slim I am,
[Amit Varma]: who giggle at all my bad jokes and flirt with me so endlessly
[Amit Varma]: that an accidental non-flirtatious statement seems like downright rudeness.
[Amit Varma]: The music will be mellow.
[Amit Varma]: The saffron will be yellow.
[Amit Varma]: This will be heaven.
[Amit Varma]: Instead, imagine my shock and horror when I find that it's really a dark and dingy dungeon.
[Amit Varma]: There are cockroaches all over.
[Amit Varma]: It smells like the underperformer in the Sulabh Shauchala family.
[Amit Varma]: There is ice cold water dripping from the ceiling.
[Amit Varma]: There are mosquitoes as big as frogs.
[Amit Varma]: There are frogs as big as cats with slimy skin that gives off mild electric shocks when they bump into you.
[Amit Varma]: The chairs have spikes on them.
[Amit Varma]: And worst of all, the music is Justin Bieber.
[Amit Varma]: I am in shock when I see all this.
[Amit Varma]: Am I really in heaven?
[Amit Varma]: I turn around towards the entrance and I see a babu in a safari suit
[Amit Varma]: wearing a badge that says,
[Amit Varma]: Undersecretary, Department of Salvation.
[Amit Varma]: What's going on? I ask him.
[Amit Varma]: Am I really in heaven?
[Amit Varma]: Yes, he says.
[Amit Varma]: You are.
[Amit Varma]: What happened to it?
[Amit Varma]: I ask.
[Amit Varma]: He replies,
[Amit Varma]: We nationalized it.
[Amit Varma]: Nationalized it.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen,
[Unknown]: our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral science.
[Amit Varma]: Please welcome your host, Amit Badma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: My topic for today is public sector banks.
[Amit Varma]: In 1969, Indira Gandhi carried out a big wave of bank nationalizations
[Amit Varma]: with immensely noble stated intentions.
[Amit Varma]: Were those bank nationalizations good for us?
[Amit Varma]: What were their unintended effects?
[Amit Varma]: Indeed, are public sector banks structurally flawed in such a way
[Amit Varma]: that the very concept makes no sense?
[Amit Varma]: To discuss all this and more, I have as my guest on the show,
[Amit Varma]: my very good friend, Kumar Anand, an economist based in Mumbai.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the show, Kumar.
[Guest]: Thank you for having me.
[Amit Varma]: Kumar, tell me, in 1969,
[Amit Varma]: when Indira Gandhi carried out her wave of bank nationalizations,
[Amit Varma]: what were the stated intentions behind the move?
[Guest]: The stated reasons could broadly be categorized into two of them.
[Guest]: One was financial inclusion.
[Guest]: So, not many people had access to the institutional form of credit.
[Guest]: So, the government wanted to make those forms of credit available to
[Guest]: people who were otherwise unbanked.
[Guest]: And second was directing credit into areas which government thought was necessary,
[Guest]: in which areas the credit should go.
[Amit Varma]: So, it was a laudable thinking that, hey, people in rural areas
[Amit Varma]: don't have access to bank credit and private banks won't open up there.
[Amit Varma]: So, let's nationalize and then we can open up branches anywhere
[Amit Varma]: and give credit to people who otherwise wouldn't get it.
[Guest]: Exactly. So, in hindsight, when academics have studied this phenomenon,
[Guest]: they have said that financial inclusion and directed credit were the two main reasons.
[Guest]: But the government's stated objective at that time itself,
[Guest]: if you read the ordinance,
[Guest]: when these ordinances were promulgated,
[Guest]: when these ordinances were promulgated and banks were nationalized,
[Guest]: the instrument through which it happened,
[Guest]: they have said that we are basically taking these resources
[Guest]: so that we can better plan the development of the country.
[Guest]: As you know, after independence, what we had done was
[Guest]: we adopted a central planning model of development
[Guest]: and for that you need a lot of resources.
[Guest]: But the problem that India faced,
[Guest]: that we had a democracy and private properties.
[Guest]: So, you can't do the kind of planning,
[Guest]: which, for example, Soviet Russia did.
[Guest]: So, you had to do these kind of appropriations.
[Amit Varma]: So, in a sense, it's just as Nehru made the mistake of thinking
[Amit Varma]: India needs to be a planned economy
[Amit Varma]: and not realizing that economies grow by themselves
[Amit Varma]: and the government should just essentially stay out of the way
[Amit Varma]: and maintain the rule of law.
[Amit Varma]: And Indira took it one step forward by saying that,
[Amit Varma]: hey, we need more resources to control and plan the economy.
[Amit Varma]: So, we will take it from the private sector.
[Guest]: Yeah, in a way, we were not learning the lessons.
[Guest]: So, for example, the planning entire thing started in 1950
[Guest]: and during the time we nationalized,
[Guest]: in the decade of 1950, we nationalized transportation,
[Guest]: we nationalized mining,
[Guest]: we nationalized parts of insurance corporations.
[Guest]: But always the reason of not getting the right result
[Guest]: from the planning was given that we don't have enough resources.
[Guest]: So, you kept on trying to get more and more resources
[Guest]: and it was in that same spirit
[Guest]: that we nationalized bank in 1969 and then again in 1980.
[Amit Varma]: Now, tell me something,
[Amit Varma]: it's one of the interesting things about the nationalizations of 69
[Amit Varma]: and all of the other similar measures that Indira carried out
[Amit Varma]: were that despite the economic reasoning given,
[Amit Varma]: which you've just laid out,
[Amit Varma]: there was also a political backdrop to it.
[Amit Varma]: Can you tell me a little bit about that political backdrop?
[Guest]: The little political backdrop could broadly be, I think, framed
[Guest]: in terms of that all major political parties
[Guest]: and the entire rhetoric at the time
[Guest]: was extremely interventionist in nature.
[Guest]: So, no matter all the mainstream parties
[Guest]: were different shades of, you could say, interventionism.
[Amit Varma]: With the sole exception of Swatantra, which was…
[Guest]: Yeah, which died soon after.
[Guest]: So, what they were trying to do is
[Guest]: they were trying to outdo each other.
[Guest]: So, you want to appear more pro-poor.
[Guest]: So, you have to go and take away properties of someone,
[Guest]: people who are otherwise rich.
[Guest]: So, bankers, insurance, people who run insurance companies,
[Guest]: you take away those properties and say that,
[Guest]: yes, we are doing it for poor and we are directing resources
[Amit Varma]: so that in future probably India will develop.
[Amit Varma]: Very intuitive, zero-sum thinking, in other words.
[Amit Varma]: And the interesting immediate backdrop is that Indira Gandhi was sort of,
[Amit Varma]: this is when the Congress kind of broke into two,
[Amit Varma]: Congress I and Congress O.
[Amit Varma]: For Indira, because the other faction of the Congress
[Amit Varma]: was leaders who had lived through the narrow years
[Amit Varma]: but kind of learned from the mistakes
[Amit Varma]: and were trying for a course correction.
[Amit Varma]: The only way for Indira to differentiate herself
[Amit Varma]: was to go further leftward.
[Amit Varma]: And this kind of pro-poor rhetoric,
[Amit Varma]: though these actions of course harm the poor the most,
[Amit Varma]: but the rhetoric is pro-poor,
[Amit Varma]: was a very good way of setting her brand apart.
[Amit Varma]: You know, Garibi Hata, Indira is India and so on.
[Amit Varma]: So, tell me something, just going back to the scene objectives.
[Amit Varma]: Before we get to the unseen effects,
[Amit Varma]: to what extent were even those scene objectives attained?
[Guest]: Well, frankly speaking, not much.
[Guest]: And when you nationalize these banks,
[Guest]: so as I was mentioning the first tranche was done in 1969
[Guest]: when you nationalized 14 banks
[Guest]: and then again in 1980 when you nationalized 6 more.
[Guest]: So what you had was majority of the banking
[Guest]: was all publicly owned, all owned by the government of India.
[Guest]: So you couldn't say that what,
[Guest]: you don't have basically a counterfactual.
[Guest]: You can't say if there was a private sector bank,
[Guest]: what would have happened?
[Guest]: Because all banking in India at the time
[Guest]: was owned by the government and run by them.
[Guest]: So, both the objectives of financial inclusion
[Guest]: and directed credit,
[Guest]: in hindsight people have studied this.
[Guest]: In 2008, I think Planning Commission set up
[Guest]: a committee under the chairmanship of Raghuram Rajan
[Guest]: and he studied public sector banking
[Guest]: in a little bit detail,
[Guest]: did some studies on ransom numbers
[Guest]: and judged the effectiveness of public sector banking
[Guest]: having existed for now about 30-40 years,
[Guest]: what were the success.
[Guest]: And on both the measures,
[Guest]: it turned out that they had not done really well.
[Guest]: So just to quickly tell you about a few of them.
[Guest]: So take for example financial inclusion.
[Guest]: On financial inclusion,
[Guest]: the committee found that
[Guest]: poor in richly branched urban areas
[Guest]: have no more access than in poor in rural areas.
[Guest]: So the problem of financial inclusion
[Guest]: is not so much about availability of branches
[Amit Varma]: but rather poverty itself.
[Guest]: Second for example could be
[Guest]: that they found that
[Guest]: no systematic relationship existed
[Guest]: between regional credit disbursement
[Guest]: and the presence of public sector bank.
[Guest]: Then they also found that in rural areas
[Guest]: where private banks are present,
[Guest]: they don't discriminate against the poor.
[Guest]: So at the end of the day,
[Guest]: it's business for them.
[Guest]: Rajan in fact has concluded that
[Guest]: the kind of environment you want to build
[Guest]: is where you compete for the poor.
[Guest]: Now when you look at the other objective
[Guest]: which was directed credit,
[Guest]: in recent years we have seen that private banks
[Guest]: have done better than public sector banking
[Guest]: in achieving the priority sector lending criteria.
[Guest]: Just to give you a quick background,
[Guest]: the priority sector lending
[Guest]: is something that RBI mandates
[Guest]: that every commercial bank in India,
[Guest]: private or public,
[Guest]: will have to lend 40 rupees
[Guest]: out to priority sectors
[Guest]: which are agriculture,
[Guest]: micro, small and medium enterprises etc.
[Guest]: So in those areas,
[Guest]: the committee found that
[Guest]: the private sector banks have done
[Guest]: a much better job than a public sector bank.
[Guest]: Then again coming back to the same directed credit,
[Guest]: they also found that
[Guest]: in terms of loan timing,
[Guest]: in times of drought in a district,
[Guest]: private banks appear to provide
[Guest]: more agricultural loans
[Guest]: while public sector banks
[Guest]: are still harmful.
[Guest]: And when it comes to quality of directed lending,
[Guest]: the share of NPAs in the PSL
[Guest]: has been higher for public sector banks.
[Amit Varma]: And the greater efficiency
[Amit Varma]: and the higher quality
[Amit Varma]: that the private banks provide
[Amit Varma]: is of course because of the incentives involved
[Amit Varma]: which we will come to later.
[Amit Varma]: But I just wanted to point out
[Amit Varma]: this funny mishearing
[Unknown]: that when you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: the Raghuram Rajan committee,
[Amit Varma]: you said they are ransom numbers
[Amit Varma]: but let's get to the crux of the matter.
[Amit Varma]: Before we even get to the unseen effects,
[Amit Varma]: the unseen effects are really a consequence
[Amit Varma]: of the incentives in play.
[Amit Varma]: How the incentives are different
[Amit Varma]: in public sector banks
[Amit Varma]: from private sector banks.
[Amit Varma]: Can you elaborate a little bit on that?
[Guest]: If you think about it,
[Guest]: think of any government enterprise.
[Guest]: Right now we are discussing public sector banks
[Guest]: but that is true for almost any other enterprise.
[Guest]: So when you are running an enterprise,
[Guest]: what is your objective?
[Guest]: If it is a private enterprise,
[Guest]: the objective is profit maximization.
[Guest]: Now I should forewarn that
[Guest]: the government and the public sector banks themselves
[Guest]: they know that the profit maximization
[Guest]: is not their goal.
[Guest]: So their goal is financial inclusion
[Guest]: and directed credit
[Guest]: and we just saw that they have not been able
[Guest]: to successfully achieve this credit.
[Guest]: Now the incentive, the way it works
[Guest]: for public sector banks
[Guest]: they don't have too much of
[Guest]: you know, they have complete job security.
[Guest]: So no matter what mishap happens
[Guest]: their jobs are guaranteed.
[Guest]: They don't have any incentive or disincentive
[Guest]: because if they do a good job
[Guest]: they are not going to get a great pay hike
[Guest]: or if they do a bad job
[Amit Varma]: they are not going to get a rap on the knuckles.
[Amit Varma]: So essentially what is true of all governments
[Amit Varma]: what is true of public sector banks
[Amit Varma]: therefore also is what Friedman mentioned
[Amit Varma]: in his four ways of spending
[Amit Varma]: so there are four ways in which you can spend money.
[Amit Varma]: One, you can spend your own money on yourself
[Amit Varma]: when you obviously try to maximize value
[Amit Varma]: because you are spending it on yourself
[Amit Varma]: but you also want to economize
[Amit Varma]: because it is your own money.
[Amit Varma]: The other is when you spend your money on someone else
[Amit Varma]: when you want to economize
[Amit Varma]: but you don't care so much about value
[Amit Varma]: because it is going to someone else.
[Amit Varma]: The third is when you spend someone else's money on yourself
[Amit Varma]: when you want value
[Amit Varma]: but you don't really care about economizing
[Amit Varma]: because it is someone else's money
[Amit Varma]: they will work in a company and send you on a foreign trip
[Amit Varma]: and you will be ordering whatever you want in room service
[Amit Varma]: because that is taken care of by the company.
[Amit Varma]: And the fourth way
[Amit Varma]: is when you spend somebody else's money on somebody else
[Amit Varma]: where you don't care about value
[Amit Varma]: and you don't care about economizing
[Amit Varma]: it is not your money
[Amit Varma]: you are not spending it on anyone else
[Amit Varma]: and that is all of government
[Amit Varma]: and to add to that
[Amit Varma]: this is the fact that all of government
[Amit Varma]: is therefore also tenured
[Amit Varma]: and their incentives are not there
[Amit Varma]: it is just their incentives revolve around
[Amit Varma]: how they can use their power for personal benefit
[Amit Varma]: and that is something that is a problem
[Amit Varma]: with any public sector enterprise
[Amit Varma]: especially public sector banks
[Guest]: and one reason why they haven't achieved their objectives.
[Guest]: In a way you could say that is true, that is correct.
[Amit Varma]: Getting to the crux of the matter
[Amit Varma]: the unseen effects
[Amit Varma]: can you elaborate on some of the unseen effects
[Guest]: that come from these perverse incentives?
[Guest]: Sure, there are too many
[Guest]: but we will limit ourselves to a few of them.
[Guest]: First you can directly look at
[Guest]: what are the direct costs in terms of
[Guest]: so these banks have to regularly go
[Guest]: for recapitalization
[Guest]: and because it is government owned
[Guest]: so the liability lies on the government
[Guest]: and government has to finance it
[Guest]: that means we taxpayers have to pay for it
[Guest]: and some of the data that we had collected
[Guest]: some time ago we found that
[Guest]: so in about 30 years
[Guest]: from 1985-86 onwards till now
[Guest]: the amount of money that taxpayers had to pay
[Guest]: is 1,47,000 crore
[Guest]: for the recapitalization of banks
[Guest]: now imagine the direct cost which we incur
[Guest]: for maintaining these banks
[Guest]: all those alternate uses
[Guest]: that these money could have been used for
[Guest]: we know that our criminal justice system
[Guest]: is so poorly staffed
[Guest]: in terms of policemen and the number of judges you can hire
[Guest]: so 1,47,000 crore is a lot of money
[Guest]: so of course one is the direct cost itself
[Guest]: then this also promotes inefficiency
[Guest]: in the entire banking system
[Guest]: so for example
[Guest]: the people who run this
[Unknown]: they don't have the skin in the game
[Guest]: so think of the example like
[Guest]: Maruti when it comes to car industry
[Guest]: and Bajaj when it comes to scooters
[Guest]: so you didn't see much of
[Guest]: or BSN or MTNL when it came to telephone
[Guest]: technological advancement when it was happening
[Guest]: when they had sort of
[Guest]: almost a monopoly on these sectors
[Guest]: so similarly the same is true with banks
[Guest]: so for the longest period
[Guest]: you didn't see any advancement
[Guest]: and even today public sector banks
[Guest]: are almost always one step behind
[Guest]: the advancement that the private sector banks have done
[Guest]: many of the public sector banks
[Guest]: they struggle with running
[Guest]: or ATMs, internet banking is crashed
[Amit Varma]: they don't run very efficiently
[Amit Varma]: just to take this point forward about
[Amit Varma]: inclusion and you mentioned
[Amit Varma]: telephones and I'm glad you do so
[Amit Varma]: like I grew up in the 80s
[Amit Varma]: where we had one government telecom provider
[Amit Varma]: which was MTNL and we had one airline
[Amit Varma]: which was Air India slash Indian Airlines
[Amit Varma]: for domestic and foreign
[Amit Varma]: and what you found was
[Amit Varma]: now I was from a privileged family
[Amit Varma]: we had phones at home
[Amit Varma]: but otherwise if you applied for a phone
[Amit Varma]: there were 5 year waiting periods
[Amit Varma]: massive scarcity
[Amit Varma]: not just technology
[Amit Varma]: just basic scarcity
[Amit Varma]: this guy couldn't dream of flying
[Amit Varma]: it was like a very big deal at the time
[Amit Varma]: and what happened is
[Amit Varma]: the moment the government opened it up
[Amit Varma]: because of competition
[Amit Varma]: inclusion happened
[Amit Varma]: today anybody can buy a phone
[Amit Varma]: today your maidservant who comes home
[Amit Varma]: has a phone which can do so much more
[Amit Varma]: than the most advanced technology
[Amit Varma]: of those times
[Amit Varma]: and today far more people fly
[Amit Varma]: than back in the day
[Amit Varma]: it's become much more commonplace
[Amit Varma]: and these specific sectors were simply opening it up
[Amit Varma]: and today therefore MTNL seems irrelevant
[Amit Varma]: Air India seems irrelevant
[Amit Varma]: and hopefully won't exist for too long
[Amit Varma]: as a government owned company
[Amit Varma]: and why doesn't the same logic apply to banking?
[Guest]: Well that is a question which has been
[Guest]: unfortunately not even been asked
[Guest]: so whether it comes to academicians
[Guest]: they think this as a political economy problem
[Guest]: this is unsolvable
[Guest]: so they just can't touch it
[Guest]: Raghuram Rajan committee report
[Guest]: it was giving us a recommendation
[Guest]: it falls short of
[Guest]: suggesting privatization of the banks
[Guest]: the most recent example is in 2014
[Guest]: I think it was RBI which
[Guest]: constituted a PGNI committee report
[Guest]: and I think they are the ones who
[Guest]: delve very deeply into the governance
[Guest]: of public sector banks
[Guest]: and they also almost you know
[Guest]: have explicitly said that
[Guest]: you know we can't consider almost
[Guest]: privatization of banks
[Guest]: so their entire set of recommendations
[Guest]: is centered around what all they can do
[Amit Varma]: within the current system
[Amit Varma]: So essentially they will identify
[Amit Varma]: It has become sort of a holy cow
[Amit Varma]: So they will identify the problem correctly
[Amit Varma]: and they know what's wrong with it
[Amit Varma]: but they just stop short of
[Amit Varma]: suggesting the correct solution
[Guest]: even though they know it
[Guest]: Is that because of pressures
[Guest]: in the political economy per se?
[Guest]: I don't know
[Guest]: maybe it could just be that
[Guest]: they see this as a holy cow
[Guest]: RBI has mandated private sector lending
[Guest]: which should achieve the objective
[Guest]: of the government
[Guest]: so no matter whether you are
[Guest]: ICICI bank or State Bank of India
[Guest]: you have to give certain amount of credit
[Guest]: so in this case 40% and 80%
[Guest]: of that goes to agriculture
[Guest]: directly to you know
[Guest]: the credit response should go into these areas
[Guest]: so it should not matter
[Guest]: I mean you have already mandated
[Amit Varma]: so whether it is State Bank of India
[Amit Varma]: tomorrow gets privatized
[Amit Varma]: as it may
[Amit Varma]: if you have the mandate
[Amit Varma]: you don't need the public sector banks
[Guest]: because your purpose is achieved
[Amit Varma]: and it is achieved better
[Amit Varma]: and more efficiently
[Amit Varma]: but I am sorry I interrupted you
[Amit Varma]: and set you off on this digression
[Amit Varma]: so the first two unseen effects
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned were
[Guest]: when banks get recapitalized
[Guest]: it basically comes from taxpayers money
[Guest]: which is us
[Amit Varma]: and you mentioned the humongous amount
[Amit Varma]: see these figures don't mean a thing to me
[Amit Varma]: because I can't comprehend 50,000 crores
[Amit Varma]: I can comprehend 50,000 or even 50 crores
[Amit Varma]: what is 50,000 crores?
[Amit Varma]: I mean if you stacked up 10 rupee coins
[Amit Varma]: you would probably get from here to the moon
[Guest]: I think so probably
[Amit Varma]: or maybe not whatever
[Guest]: we leave it to someone else
[Amit Varma]: if you take a different currency
[Amit Varma]: probably Mars even
[Amit Varma]: yeah I mean Zimbabwe currency
[Amit Varma]: you can just get out of the Milky Way
[Amit Varma]: right so the two unseen effects
[Amit Varma]: one is the fact that
[Amit Varma]: all the recapitalization expenses
[Amit Varma]: are basically born by us
[Amit Varma]: and you've demonstrated how it has happened
[Amit Varma]: through the years 50,000 crores
[Amit Varma]: over the last three years
[Amit Varma]: and the second is that
[Amit Varma]: there's inefficiency because of incentives
[Amit Varma]: because the bureaucrats who run the banks
[Amit Varma]: have no skin in the game as you put it
[Amit Varma]: and therefore they don't really
[Guest]: I mean why should they do a good job
[Guest]: what else?
[Guest]: so we have been listening recently
[Guest]: rising NPS is a part of that
[Guest]: now how does that happen?
[Guest]: so imagine a world where you have a monopoly
[Guest]: over giving out banking
[Guest]: and today almost about 70% of the banking business
[Guest]: is run by public sector banks
[Guest]: in many areas they are the only banks operating
[Guest]: so if you want a loan
[Guest]: you have to go to that neighborhood bank
[Guest]: which is owned by the government
[Guest]: and the guy sitting there at the head of the table
[Guest]: who has to sign your loan
[Guest]: and award that loan to you
[Guest]: he has this arbitrary power
[Guest]: and you can't turn to someone else
[Guest]: the local moneylender you will go to
[Guest]: will probably charge you 40% or maybe even more
[Guest]: so you know that in this case
[Guest]: you are stuck with that
[Guest]: so what this does is
[Guest]: well this becomes a case of corruption then
[Guest]: so the arbitrary power
[Guest]: which is now lying in the hands of monopoly
[Guest]: in a way which has been existed for a long time
[Guest]: and the incentives the way we discussed
[Guest]: in a way breeds corruption
[Guest]: it becomes a breeding ground for corruption
[Guest]: outside of that
[Guest]: when we are talking about NPAs
[Guest]: a direct and obvious consequence of all this
[Guest]: is the higher NPAs
[Guest]: there is no need or incentive for the PSB employee
[Guest]: to do a thorough check of a prospective borrower
[Guest]: so if I go and want a loan
[Guest]: for about a crore rupees
[Guest]: to buy a house from an ICCA bank
[Guest]: the guy who is going to award me that loan
[Guest]: is going to be very thorough with this
[Guest]: but if he is going to look into my credit history
[Guest]: whether I have paid back loans in the past on time or not
[Guest]: now there are agencies which are doing this kind of
[Guest]: reporting and background checks for you
[Guest]: but not necessarily those kind of incentives
[Guest]: exist for public sector bank
[Guest]: and therefore you will see that the NPAs
[Guest]: for the public sector bank
[Guest]: are almost always higher than
[Amit Varma]: those for private sector banks
[Amit Varma]: in fact the opposite incentives exist
[Amit Varma]: because often if powerful politicians say
[Amit Varma]: give him a loan or give her a loan
[Amit Varma]: they don't really have an option but to agree
[Amit Varma]: the columnist Vivek Kaul wrote an interesting piece
[Amit Varma]: on the site that I edit
[Amit Varma]: Pragati.com
[Amit Varma]: the name of the piece is called
[Amit Varma]: the separation of knowledge and power
[Amit Varma]: and he gave some great figures in there
[Amit Varma]: now consider these
[Amit Varma]: in the SBI their bad loans ratio of the bank
[Amit Varma]: when it came to home loans was 0.43%
[Amit Varma]: when it came to auto loans it was 0.65%
[Amit Varma]: for overall retail loans it was 0.55%
[Amit Varma]: but Vivek's piece reveals
[Amit Varma]: for large corporates it's 9.67%
[Amit Varma]: for mid corporates it's 19.35%
[Amit Varma]: for small and medium enterprises
[Amit Varma]: it's 7.04%
[Amit Varma]: which means 10 to 20 times
[Amit Varma]: as much as for auto loans or retail loans
[Amit Varma]: and far far more than the NPAs
[Amit Varma]: of private sector banks
[Amit Varma]: and the reason for this is essentially
[Amit Varma]: that politician tells you
[Amit Varma]: that you have to give him
[Amit Varma]: and another interesting figure he points out
[Amit Varma]: is he refers to a specific loan
[Amit Varma]: where a public sector bank
[Amit Varma]: gave a loan at a debt to equity ratio
[Amit Varma]: of 14.6 to 1
[Amit Varma]: while no private sector bank
[Amit Varma]: will ever give a similar loan
[Amit Varma]: at a debt to equity ratio more than 2 to 1
[Amit Varma]: and this is 14.6 to 1
[Amit Varma]: this specific loan that he talks about
[Amit Varma]: which is obviously political pressure
[Amit Varma]: and is deeply irresponsible
[Amit Varma]: and that is why we have such a massive NPA
[Guest]: problem in the country today
[Guest]: and this brings me to another unseen effect
[Guest]: of the ownership of government banks
[Guest]: is that it creates an uneven playing field
[Guest]: in the market
[Guest]: so there is sort of sovereign guarantee
[Guest]: which lies behind all these public sector banks
[Guest]: which have been created
[Guest]: by an almost act of parliament
[Guest]: so you won't see even their name appear
[Guest]: in the other public sector enterprises
[Guest]: so there is a sovereign guarantee
[Guest]: which these public sector banks enjoy
[Guest]: which a private sector bank does not enjoy
[Guest]: so a public sector bank can never go bust
[Guest]: that means because they have the taxpayers
[Guest]: always standing behind to bail them out
[Amit Varma]: so essentially if a public sector bank
[Amit Varma]: gives a loan to someone for 70,000 crores
[Amit Varma]: and that person defaults
[Amit Varma]: hey no sweat because the taxpayer pays for it
[Amit Varma]: right whereas with the private sector bank
[Amit Varma]: the taxpayer doesn't pay for it
[Amit Varma]: the bank can go bust
[Amit Varma]: it's the bank's responsibility
[Amit Varma]: and therefore the incentives are much better
[Guest]: within the organization to prevent
[Guest]: that kind of occurrence
[Guest]: so it's a forced market to develop
[Guest]: for banking
[Guest]: because it depresses
[Guest]: the private sector bank's competitiveness
[Guest]: to compete
[Guest]: and even then you will find it
[Guest]: our private sector banks
[Guest]: have done excellently well
[Guest]: by grabbing almost more than 30%
[Guest]: of the market share
[Guest]: from the time they were allowed
[Amit Varma]: to come in and start being in the business
[Amit Varma]: with banking
[Amit Varma]: but there is an argument that the counterfactual
[Amit Varma]: that private sector banks simply didn't exist
[Amit Varma]: because what public sector banks also do
[Amit Varma]: as you pointed out in our conversation
[Amit Varma]: with me earlier
[Amit Varma]: is that they create an uneven playing field
[Amit Varma]: which stops private sector banks from growing
[Guest]: exactly
[Guest]: then there are some of the other unseen effects
[Guest]: of public sector banks
[Guest]: are that it depresses the growth in the economy
[Guest]: so when the flow of credit is determined
[Guest]: arbitrarily by the government or bureaucrat
[Guest]: and not by the profitability or viability
[Guest]: of a business
[Guest]: then the hardened savings
[Guest]: which a banking institution
[Guest]: is supposed to channelize
[Guest]: into other productive users
[Guest]: now gets channelized
[Guest]: into non-productive users
[Guest]: that's why the higher NPAs etc
[Guest]: so you see that the otherwise growth
[Guest]: of the economy
[Guest]: would have been much higher
[Guest]: than what we see now
[Guest]: which also causes less jobs to be created
[Amit Varma]: and other related effects
[Amit Varma]: exactly, so in a proper free market
[Amit Varma]: where everything is just for supply and demand
[Amit Varma]: the money would go where the money is needed the most
[Amit Varma]: and that is something that the government
[Amit Varma]: with its fatal conceit of central planning
[Guest]: simply cannot manage
[Guest]: right, right
[Guest]: then another unseen effect
[Guest]: is the damage it does to the fiscal consolidation
[Guest]: so we have something called FRBM Act
[Guest]: Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act
[Guest]: where the government of India
[Guest]: has put a constraint on itself
[Guest]: saying that we will abide by these rules
[Guest]: and not spend more than
[Guest]: say a certain amount of money
[Guest]: in this case being more than 3% of GDP
[Guest]: as fiscal deficit
[Guest]: so they won't cross that
[Guest]: but from the time of financial crisis
[Guest]: they have always been breaching that number
[Guest]: they have never gotten back to it
[Guest]: and sovereign credit rating agencies
[Guest]: when they come and rate India
[Guest]: they have always reprimanded in a way
[Guest]: the government saying that
[Guest]: you guys have been very profligate
[Guest]: particularly when it comes to banking
[Guest]: and not being able to control your NPAs
[Guest]: it prevents India from getting a good rating
[Guest]: and when you don't get a good rating
[Guest]: that means the cost of borrowing
[Guest]: for the entire economy goes up
[Guest]: so any business when they go out of India
[Guest]: try to borrow money
[Guest]: the cost of borrowing for it goes up
[Guest]: and similarly for India itself
[Guest]: the sovereign bonds that the government of India
[Guest]: will issue
[Amit Varma]: it will be able to raise funds
[Amit Varma]: at a higher rate from foreign borrowers
[Amit Varma]: so the ripple effects of that
[Amit Varma]: essentially go far far beyond
[Amit Varma]: the tax payers money going into
[Amit Varma]: capitalizing these banks
[Amit Varma]: going to the whole economy
[Amit Varma]: being curtailed as a result of all of this
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned the financial crisis
[Amit Varma]: so I want to ask you a question here
[Amit Varma]: which a lot of people speaking
[Amit Varma]: in favor of public sector banks
[Amit Varma]: often say that look
[Amit Varma]: we didn't suffer so badly
[Amit Varma]: from the 2008 financial crisis
[Amit Varma]: because so much of our banking
[Guest]: was public sector and blah blah blah
[Guest]: and this is the way the system is
[Guest]: so imagine a guy who is living in
[Guest]: a jungle of say central India
[Guest]: somewhere in it could be
[Guest]: Chhattisgarh or Jharkhand
[Guest]: when the crisis hit he was not affected at all
[Guest]: the same analogy can be used for India
[Guest]: so if you are not integrated
[Guest]: with the world economy
[Guest]: and a crisis is hit
[Guest]: and if you don't say that I didn't get hurt
[Guest]: because I was able to regulate
[Guest]: my banking system very well
[Guest]: it's not a very good argument to make
[Guest]: but you also lost quite a lot
[Guest]: had you been integrated into the global economy
[Guest]: you would have been able to have access
[Guest]: to these sources of finance
[Guest]: you would have been able to make
[Guest]: the kind of investments which you were never able to do
[Guest]: etc. etc.
[Amit Varma]: so the opportunity cost is very high that way
[Amit Varma]: in other words what you are saying is
[Amit Varma]: if we were integrated into the world economy
[Amit Varma]: the gains from that would have been
[Amit Varma]: so much over the years
[Amit Varma]: that even if we suffered more
[Amit Varma]: in percentage loss terms
[Amit Varma]: we would still overall be far better off than what we were
[Guest]: definitely
[Guest]: I mean look at the per capita income
[Guest]: of the countries which suffered
[Guest]: and per capita income of India
[Guest]: even after the crisis
[Guest]: they are much better off
[Amit Varma]: than we are today
[Guest]: so in a sense it's not a feature it's a bug
[Guest]: you could say that yeah
[Guest]: but I'll also say that
[Guest]: public sector banks
[Guest]: are not exactly completely
[Guest]: the culprits here
[Guest]: they are victims
[Guest]: let me explain that a bit
[Guest]: so public sector banks
[Guest]: have to go through dual regulation
[Guest]: so on the one hand
[Guest]: RBI regulates them like every other
[Guest]: commercial bank private banks
[Guest]: while Ministry of Finance also regulates them
[Guest]: number two is that
[Guest]: the poor pay compared to
[Guest]: a private sector bank
[Guest]: so which we have discussed briefly
[Guest]: in the beginning
[Guest]: that there is no way
[Guest]: and which cannot be changed without permission
[Guest]: from say Ministry of Finance
[Guest]: or a finance minister or somewhere
[Guest]: at that level
[Guest]: you cannot get good talent
[Guest]: through which you can probably do a better business
[Guest]: then there is external
[Guest]: vigilance enforcement through
[Guest]: Chief Vigilance Commissioner
[Guest]: or CBI
[Guest]: which are mandated to look into
[Guest]: the workings and the dealings
[Guest]: of public sector bank
[Guest]: in certain cases public sector banks
[Guest]: do RBI inquiries so what happens is that
[Guest]: the incentive that the banker has
[Guest]: knowing that he is going
[Guest]: to be publicly
[Guest]: scrutinized
[Guest]: from all these various agencies
[Guest]: is to play a little more safe
[Guest]: and not trying to take
[Guest]: kind of risks that
[Guest]: otherwise a private banker
[Guest]: would do and therefore increase
[Guest]: and these are some of the reasons probably
[Guest]: through which a public sector bank
[Amit Varma]: should be on par and play with
[Guest]: it should be freed up basically
[Guest]: and try and let them operate
[Guest]: like a private sector bank and that can happen
[Guest]: through making them
[Amit Varma]: like privatizing them
[Amit Varma]: so in a sense this is like the flip side of the NPA problem
[Amit Varma]: the NPA problem is that you are forced
[Amit Varma]: by political pressure to give out loans
[Amit Varma]: to people which you know are bad loans
[Amit Varma]: that are never coming back
[Amit Varma]: and the flip side of that is that
[Amit Varma]: when it comes to giving out loans
[Amit Varma]: because you know that every action of yours
[Amit Varma]: will be scrutinized
[Amit Varma]: and whereas with a private sector bank
[Amit Varma]: there is a healthy amount of risk
[Amit Varma]: that you have to take on
[Amit Varma]: with due diligence of course
[Amit Varma]: which public sector bank employees
[Amit Varma]: because they are not being rated on performance per se
[Amit Varma]: just want to cover their asses
[Amit Varma]: except when order comes from Netaji
[Amit Varma]: Right, exactly
[Amit Varma]: Kumar, it's been a pleasure having you on the show
[Unknown]: Thanks so much
[Amit Varma]: Thank you very much
[Amit Varma]: And that's all we have for today
[Amit Varma]: I'll see you next week
[Amit Varma]: And if you want to hear more of me
[Amit Varma]: you can follow me on Twitter
[Amit Varma]: at Amit Verma
[Amit Varma]: That's A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A
[Amit Varma]: You can also head on over to my blog
[Amit Varma]: IndiaUncut at IndiaUncut.com
[Amit Varma]: and if you want to binge listen
[Amit Varma]: to past episodes of the seen and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: and who can blame you for that
[Amit Varma]: head on over to
[Amit Varma]: seenunseen.in
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the seen and the unseen
[Amit Varma]: check out another hit show
[Amit Varma]: from Indusworks Media Networks
[Amit Varma]: Cyrus Says
[Amit Varma]: which is hosted by my old colleague from MTV
[Amit Varma]: Cyrus Brocha
[Amit Varma]: You can download it on any podcasting network
[Unknown]: Excuse me brother, excuse me
[Unknown]: Tell me madam
[Unknown]: What's on the menu?
[Unknown]: There is seen unseen, podcast, on course
[Unknown]: free discovery project, empowering series
[Unknown]: sex facts, IWM likes, simplified, keeping it queer
[Unknown]: Tings and Destinations, My Neighbour Zuckerberg
[Unknown]: and The Fan Garage
[Unknown]: What do you want?
[Unknown]: Can you repeat it once?
[Unknown]: I don't repeat
[Unknown]: Go to IWMpodcast.com and listen to it
[Unknown]: or download their app
[Unknown]: www.IWM.com